doc/source/contributor/debug-ci-failures.rst, before:

.. _debug-ci-failures:

=====================
Debugging CI failures
=====================


If you see `FAILURE` in one or more jobs for your patch please don't panic.
This guide may help you to find the initial reason for the failure.
When clicking in the failed job you will be redirect to a page that
contains all the logs and configurations used to run the job.


Using Ara Report
================

The `ara-report` folder will redirect you to a UI where you can see all the
playbooks that were used to execute the job, and you will be able to find the
playbook that failed. Click on the `Tasks` button for the playbook that failed
and then click on the `Status` button for the task that has failed.

You will be able to see what command was being executed and you can test
locally to see if you can reproduce the failure locally.


Looking at logs
===============

If you want to go more deep in your investigation you can look at the
`job-output` file, it will give you an overall idea of the failures and you
can identify services that may be involved. Under `controller/logs` you can
find the the configuration and logs of those services.

Commit message:

Update doc for CI
- Ara report was removed and we have the Zuul web page
that shows the information about the job build.

Change-Id: I74f70ee21421746983cb3c8d290cc6a619819e34

doc/source/contributor/debug-ci-failures.rst, after:

.. _debug-ci-failures:

=====================
Debugging CI failures
=====================


If you see `FAILURE` in one or more jobs for your patch please don't panic.
This guide may help you to find the initial reason for the failure.
When clicking in the failed job you will be redirect to the Zuul web page that
contains all the information about the job build.


Zuul Web Page
=============

The page has three tabs: `Summary`, `Logs` and `Console`.

* Summary: Contains overall information about the build of the job, if the job
  build failed it will contain a general output of the failure.

* Logs:  Contains all configurations and log files about all services that
  were used in the job. This will give you an overall idea of the failures and
  you can identify services that may be involved. The `job-output` file can
  give an overall idea of the failures and what services may be involved.

* Console: Contains all the playbooks that were executed, by clicking in the
  arrow before each playbook name you can find the roles and commands that were
  executed.
