doc/source/contributor/ironic-multitenant-networking.rst, before:

==========================================
Ironic multitenant networking and DevStack
==========================================

This guide will walk you through using OpenStack Ironic/Neutron with the ML2
``networking-generic-switch`` plugin.


Using VMs as baremetal servers
==============================

This scenario shows how to setup Devstack to use Ironic/Neutron integration
with VMs as baremetal servers and ML2 ``networking-generic-switch``
that interacts with OVS.


DevStack Configuration
----------------------
The following is ``local.conf`` that will setup Devstack with 3 VMs that are
registered in ironic. ``networking-generic-switch`` driver will be installed and
configured in Neutron.

::

    [[local|localrc]]

    # Configure ironic from ironic devstack plugin.
    enable_plugin ironic https://opendev.org/openstack/ironic

    # Install networking-generic-switch Neutron ML2 driver that interacts with OVS
    enable_plugin networking-generic-switch https://opendev.org/openstack/networking-generic-switch

    # Add link local info when registering Ironic node
    IRONIC_USE_LINK_LOCAL=True

    IRONIC_ENABLED_NETWORK_INTERFACES=flat,neutron
    IRONIC_NETWORK_INTERFACE=neutron

    #Networking configuration
    OVS_PHYSICAL_BRIDGE=brbm
    PHYSICAL_NETWORK=mynetwork
    IRONIC_PROVISION_NETWORK_NAME=ironic-provision
    IRONIC_PROVISION_SUBNET_PREFIX=10.0.5.0/24
    IRONIC_PROVISION_SUBNET_GATEWAY=10.0.5.1

    Q_PLUGIN=ml2
    ENABLE_TENANT_VLANS=True
    Q_ML2_TENANT_NETWORK_TYPE=vlan
    TENANT_VLAN_RANGE=100:150

    # Credentials
    ADMIN_PASSWORD=password
    RABBIT_PASSWORD=password
    DATABASE_PASSWORD=password
    SERVICE_PASSWORD=password
    SERVICE_TOKEN=password
    SWIFT_HASH=password
    SWIFT_TEMPURL_KEY=password

    # Enable Ironic API and Ironic Conductor
    enable_service ironic
    enable_service ir-api
    enable_service ir-cond

    # Disable nova novnc service, ironic does not support it anyway.
    disable_service n-novnc

    # Enable Swift for the direct deploy interface.
    enable_service s-proxy
    enable_service s-object
    enable_service s-container
    enable_service s-account

    # Disable Horizon
    disable_service horizon

    # Disable Cinder
    disable_service cinder c-sch c-api c-vol

    # Disable Tempest
    disable_service tempest

    # Swift temp URL's are required for the direct deploy interface.
    SWIFT_ENABLE_TEMPURLS=True

    # Create 3 virtual machines to pose as Ironic's baremetal nodes.
    IRONIC_VM_COUNT=3
    IRONIC_BAREMETAL_BASIC_OPS=True

    # Enable additional hardware types, if needed.
    #IRONIC_ENABLED_HARDWARE_TYPES=ipmi,fake-hardware
    # Don't forget that many hardware types require enabling of additional
    # interfaces, most often power and management:
    #IRONIC_ENABLED_MANAGEMENT_INTERFACES=ipmitool,fake
    #IRONIC_ENABLED_POWER_INTERFACES=ipmitool,fake
    #IRONIC_DEFAULT_DEPLOY_INTERFACE=direct

    # Change this to alter the default driver for nodes created by devstack.
    # This driver should be in the enabled list above.
    IRONIC_DEPLOY_DRIVER=ipmi

    # The parameters below represent the minimum possible values to create
    # functional nodes.
    IRONIC_VM_SPECS_RAM=1024
    IRONIC_VM_SPECS_DISK=10

    # Size of the ephemeral partition in GB. Use 0 for no ephemeral partition.
    IRONIC_VM_EPHEMERAL_DISK=0

    # To build your own IPA ramdisk from source, set this to True
    IRONIC_BUILD_DEPLOY_RAMDISK=False

    VIRT_DRIVER=ironic

    # By default, DevStack creates a 10.0.0.0/24 network for instances.
    # If this overlaps with the hosts network, you may adjust with the
    # following.
    NETWORK_GATEWAY=10.1.0.1
    FIXED_RANGE=10.1.0.0/24
    FIXED_NETWORK_SIZE=256

    # Log all output to files
    LOGFILE=$HOME/devstack.log
    LOGDIR=$HOME/logs
    IRONIC_VM_LOG_DIR=$HOME/ironic-bm-logs

Commit message:

Set glance limit for baremetal friendly images
The devstack default limit enforcement for glance defaults
to 1GB, and unfortunately this is too small for many to use
larger images such as centos which includes hardware firmware
images for execution on baremetal where drivers need the vendor
blobs in order to load/run.

Sets ironic-base to 5GB, and updates examples accordingly.

Depends-On: https://review.opendev.org/c/openstack/devstack/+/801309
Change-Id: I41294eb571d07a270a69e5b816cdbad530749a94

doc/source/contributor/ironic-multitenant-networking.rst, after:

==========================================
Ironic multitenant networking and DevStack
==========================================

This guide will walk you through using OpenStack Ironic/Neutron with the ML2
``networking-generic-switch`` plugin.


Using VMs as baremetal servers
==============================

This scenario shows how to setup Devstack to use Ironic/Neutron integration
with VMs as baremetal servers and ML2 ``networking-generic-switch``
that interacts with OVS.


DevStack Configuration
----------------------
The following is ``local.conf`` that will setup Devstack with 3 VMs that are
registered in ironic. ``networking-generic-switch`` driver will be installed and
configured in Neutron.

::

    [[local|localrc]]

    # Configure ironic from ironic devstack plugin.
    enable_plugin ironic https://opendev.org/openstack/ironic

    # Install networking-generic-switch Neutron ML2 driver that interacts with OVS
    enable_plugin networking-generic-switch https://opendev.org/openstack/networking-generic-switch

    # Add link local info when registering Ironic node
    IRONIC_USE_LINK_LOCAL=True

    IRONIC_ENABLED_NETWORK_INTERFACES=flat,neutron
    IRONIC_NETWORK_INTERFACE=neutron

    #Networking configuration
    OVS_PHYSICAL_BRIDGE=brbm
    PHYSICAL_NETWORK=mynetwork
    IRONIC_PROVISION_NETWORK_NAME=ironic-provision
    IRONIC_PROVISION_SUBNET_PREFIX=10.0.5.0/24
    IRONIC_PROVISION_SUBNET_GATEWAY=10.0.5.1

    Q_PLUGIN=ml2
    ENABLE_TENANT_VLANS=True
    Q_ML2_TENANT_NETWORK_TYPE=vlan
    TENANT_VLAN_RANGE=100:150

    # Credentials
    ADMIN_PASSWORD=password
    RABBIT_PASSWORD=password
    DATABASE_PASSWORD=password
    SERVICE_PASSWORD=password
    SERVICE_TOKEN=password
    SWIFT_HASH=password
    SWIFT_TEMPURL_KEY=password

    # Enable Ironic API and Ironic Conductor
    enable_service ironic
    enable_service ir-api
    enable_service ir-cond

    # Disable nova novnc service, ironic does not support it anyway.
    disable_service n-novnc

    # Enable Swift for the direct deploy interface.
    enable_service s-proxy
    enable_service s-object
    enable_service s-container
    enable_service s-account

    # Disable Horizon
    disable_service horizon

    # Disable Cinder
    disable_service cinder c-sch c-api c-vol

    # Disable Tempest
    disable_service tempest

    # Set glance's default limit to be baremetal image friendly
    GLANCE_LIMIT_IMAGE_SIZE_TOTAL=5000

    # Swift temp URL's are required for the direct deploy interface.
    SWIFT_ENABLE_TEMPURLS=True

    # Create 3 virtual machines to pose as Ironic's baremetal nodes.
    IRONIC_VM_COUNT=3
    IRONIC_BAREMETAL_BASIC_OPS=True

    # Enable additional hardware types, if needed.
    #IRONIC_ENABLED_HARDWARE_TYPES=ipmi,fake-hardware
    # Don't forget that many hardware types require enabling of additional
    # interfaces, most often power and management:
    #IRONIC_ENABLED_MANAGEMENT_INTERFACES=ipmitool,fake
    #IRONIC_ENABLED_POWER_INTERFACES=ipmitool,fake
    #IRONIC_DEFAULT_DEPLOY_INTERFACE=direct

    # Change this to alter the default driver for nodes created by devstack.
    # This driver should be in the enabled list above.
    IRONIC_DEPLOY_DRIVER=ipmi

    # The parameters below represent the minimum possible values to create
    # functional nodes.
    IRONIC_VM_SPECS_RAM=1024
    IRONIC_VM_SPECS_DISK=10

    # Size of the ephemeral partition in GB. Use 0 for no ephemeral partition.
    IRONIC_VM_EPHEMERAL_DISK=0

    # To build your own IPA ramdisk from source, set this to True
    IRONIC_BUILD_DEPLOY_RAMDISK=False

    VIRT_DRIVER=ironic

    # By default, DevStack creates a 10.0.0.0/24 network for instances.
    # If this overlaps with the hosts network, you may adjust with the
    # following.
    NETWORK_GATEWAY=10.1.0.1
    FIXED_RANGE=10.1.0.0/24
    FIXED_NETWORK_SIZE=256

    # Log all output to files
    LOGFILE=$HOME/devstack.log
    LOGDIR=$HOME/logs
    IRONIC_VM_LOG_DIR=$HOME/ironic-bm-logs
