doc/source/contributor/jobs-description.rst, before:

.. _jobs-description:

================
Jobs description
================

The description of each jobs that runs in the CI when you submit a patch for
`openstack/ironic` is visible in :ref:`table_jobs_description`.

.. _table_jobs_description:

.. list-table:: Table. OpenStack Ironic CI jobs description
  :widths: 53 47
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Job name
    - Description
  * - ironic-tox-unit-with-driver-libs
    - Runs Ironic unit tests with the driver dependencies installed under
      Python3
  * - ironic-tempest-functional-python3
    - Deploys Ironic in standalone mode and runs tempest functional tests
      that matches the regex `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.api` under Python3
  * - ironic-grenade
    - Deploys Ironic in a DevStack and runs upgrade for all enabled services.
  * - ironic-standalone
    - Deploys Ironic in standalone mode and runs tempest tests that match
      the regex `ironic_standalone`.
  * - ironic-standalone-redfish
    - Deploys Ironic in standalone mode and runs tempest tests that match
      the regex `ironic_standalone` using the redfish driver.
  * - ironic-tempest-partition-bios-redfish-pxe
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use dib ramdisk partition
      image with `pxe` boot and `redfish` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario`, also deploys 1 virtual
      baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-partition-uefi-redfish-vmedia
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use dib ramdisk partition
      image with `vmedia` boot and `redfish` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario`, also deploys 1 virtual
      baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-wholedisk-bios-snmp-pxe
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use a pre-built dib
      ramdisk wholedisk image that is downloaded from a Swift temporary url,
      `pxe` boot and `snmp` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario` and deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-ipa-partition-pxe_ipmitool
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack under Python3, configured to use dib
      ramdisk partition image with `pxe` boot and `ipmi` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario` and deploy 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-ipa-partition-uefi-pxe_ipmitool
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use dib ramdisk partition
      image with `uefi` boot and `ipmi` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario`, also deploys 1 virtual
      baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-ipa-wholedisk-direct-tinyipa-multinode
    - Deploys Ironic in a multinode DevStack, configured to use a pre-build
      tinyipa ramdisk wholedisk image that is downloaded from a Swift
      temporary url, `pxe` boot and `ipmi` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `(ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario|test_schedule_to_all_nodes)`
      and deploys 7 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-bios-ipmi-direct-tinyipa
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use a pre-build tinyipa
      ramdisk wholedisk image that is downloaded from a Swift temporary url,
      `pxe` boot and `ipmi` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario` and deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-bfv
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack with cinder enabled, so it can deploy
      baremetal using boot from volume.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex `baremetal_boot_from_volume`
      and deploys 3 virtual baremetal nodes using boot from volume.
  * - ironic-tempest-ipa-partition-uefi-pxe-grub2
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use pxe with uefi and grub2
      and `ipmi` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario` and deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - metalsmith-integration-glance-localboot-centos8-uefi
    - Tests the integration between Ironic and Metalsmith using Glance as
      image source and CentOS8 with local boot and uefi.
  * - ironic-tox-bandit
    - Runs bandit security tests in a tox environment to find known issues in
      the Ironic code.
  * - ironic-inspector-tempest
    - Deploys Ironic and Ironic Inspector in DevStack, configured to use a
      pre-build tinyipa ramdisk wholedisk image that is downloaded from a
      Swift temporary url, `pxe` boot and `ipmi` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex `InspectorBasicTest` and
      deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-inspector-tempest-managed-non-standalone
    - Deploys Ironic and Ironic Inspector in DevStack, configured to use a
      pre-build tinyipa ramdisk wholedisk image that is downloaded from a
      Swift temporary url, `pxe` boot and `ipmi` driver.
      Boot is managed by ironic, ironic-inspector runs in non-standalone mode.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex `InspectorBasicTest` and
      deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-inspector-tempest-partition-bios-redfish-vmedia
    - Deploys Ironic and Ironic Inspector in DevStack, configured to use
      `vmedia` boot and `redfish` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex `InspectorBasicTest` and
      deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-ipa-wholedisk-bios-ipmi-direct-dib
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use a pre-built dib
      ramdisk wholedisk image that is downloaded from http url, `pxe` boot
      and `ipmi` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario` and deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - bifrost-integration-tinyipa-ubuntu-focal
    - Tests the integration between Ironic and Bifrost using a tinyipa image.
  * - bifrost-integration-redfish-vmedia-uefi-centos-8
    - Tests the integration between Ironic and Bifrost using redfish vmedia and
      a dib image based on centos 8.
  * - ironic-tempest-pxe_ipmitool-postgres
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use tinyipa ramdisk partition
      image with `pxe` boot and `ipmi` driver and postgres instead of mysql.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario`, also deploys 1 virtual
      baremetal.

Commit message:

Clean up jobs with legacy names
Not everyone on the team even knows what pxe_ipmitool used to mean :)
Furthermore, we don't need "ipa" in job names, everything uses IPA
for... even longer than pxe_ipmitool does not exist.

While here, one job was clearly meant to use BIOS boot, but it does not.

Change-Id: I8a37efa0f222361f30ddb7fa621548685a40f961

doc/source/contributor/jobs-description.rst, after:

.. _jobs-description:

================
Jobs description
================

The description of each jobs that runs in the CI when you submit a patch for
`openstack/ironic` is visible in :ref:`table_jobs_description`.

.. _table_jobs_description:

.. list-table:: Table. OpenStack Ironic CI jobs description
  :widths: 53 47
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Job name
    - Description
  * - ironic-tox-unit-with-driver-libs
    - Runs Ironic unit tests with the driver dependencies installed under
      Python3
  * - ironic-tempest-functional-python3
    - Deploys Ironic in standalone mode and runs tempest functional tests
      that matches the regex `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.api` under Python3
  * - ironic-grenade
    - Deploys Ironic in a DevStack and runs upgrade for all enabled services.
  * - ironic-standalone
    - Deploys Ironic in standalone mode and runs tempest tests that match
      the regex `ironic_standalone`.
  * - ironic-standalone-redfish
    - Deploys Ironic in standalone mode and runs tempest tests that match
      the regex `ironic_standalone` using the redfish driver.
  * - ironic-tempest-partition-bios-redfish-pxe
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use dib ramdisk partition
      image with `pxe` boot and `redfish` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario`, also deploys 1 virtual
      baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-partition-uefi-redfish-vmedia
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use dib ramdisk partition
      image with `vmedia` boot and `redfish` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario`, also deploys 1 virtual
      baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-wholedisk-bios-snmp-pxe
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use a pre-built dib
      ramdisk wholedisk image that is downloaded from a Swift temporary url,
      `pxe` boot and `snmp` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario` and deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-partition-bios-ipmi-pxe
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use dib ramdisk, a partition
      image, `pxe` boot in legacy mode and `ipmi` hardware type.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario` and deploy 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-partition-uefi-ipmi-pxe
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use dib ramdisk, a partition
      image, `pxe` boot in UEFI mode and `ipmi` hardware type.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario`, also deploys 1 virtual
      baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-ipa-wholedisk-direct-tinyipa-multinode
    - Deploys Ironic in a multinode DevStack, configured to use a pre-build
      tinyipa ramdisk wholedisk image that is downloaded from a Swift
      temporary url, `pxe` boot and `ipmi` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `(ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario|test_schedule_to_all_nodes)`
      and deploys 7 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-bios-ipmi-direct-tinyipa
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use a pre-build tinyipa
      ramdisk wholedisk image that is downloaded from a Swift temporary url,
      `pxe` boot and `ipmi` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario` and deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-bfv
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack with cinder enabled, so it can deploy
      baremetal using boot from volume.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex `baremetal_boot_from_volume`
      and deploys 3 virtual baremetal nodes using boot from volume.
  * - ironic-tempest-ipa-partition-uefi-pxe-grub2
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use pxe with uefi and grub2
      and `ipmi` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario` and deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - metalsmith-integration-glance-localboot-centos8-uefi
    - Tests the integration between Ironic and Metalsmith using Glance as
      image source and CentOS8 with local boot and uefi.
  * - ironic-tox-bandit
    - Runs bandit security tests in a tox environment to find known issues in
      the Ironic code.
  * - ironic-inspector-tempest
    - Deploys Ironic and Ironic Inspector in DevStack, configured to use a
      pre-build tinyipa ramdisk wholedisk image that is downloaded from a
      Swift temporary url, `pxe` boot and `ipmi` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex `InspectorBasicTest` and
      deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-inspector-tempest-managed-non-standalone
    - Deploys Ironic and Ironic Inspector in DevStack, configured to use a
      pre-build tinyipa ramdisk wholedisk image that is downloaded from a
      Swift temporary url, `pxe` boot and `ipmi` driver.
      Boot is managed by ironic, ironic-inspector runs in non-standalone mode.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex `InspectorBasicTest` and
      deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-inspector-tempest-partition-bios-redfish-vmedia
    - Deploys Ironic and Ironic Inspector in DevStack, configured to use
      `vmedia` boot and `redfish` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex `InspectorBasicTest` and
      deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - ironic-tempest-ipa-wholedisk-bios-ipmi-direct-dib
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use a pre-built dib
      ramdisk wholedisk image that is downloaded from http url, `pxe` boot
      and `ipmi` driver.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario` and deploys 1 virtual baremetal.
  * - bifrost-integration-tinyipa-ubuntu-focal
    - Tests the integration between Ironic and Bifrost using a tinyipa image.
  * - bifrost-integration-redfish-vmedia-uefi-centos-8
    - Tests the integration between Ironic and Bifrost using redfish vmedia and
      a dib image based on centos 8.
  * - ironic-tempest-pxe_ipmitool-postgres
    - Deploys Ironic in DevStack, configured to use tinyipa ramdisk partition
      image with `pxe` boot and `ipmi` driver and postgres instead of mysql.
      Runs tempest tests that match the regex
      `ironic_tempest_plugin.tests.scenario`, also deploys 1 virtual
      baremetal.
