doc/source/admin/interfaces/boot.rst, before:

===============
Boot interfaces
===============

The boot interface manages booting of both the deploy ramdisk and the user
instances on the bare metal node.

The `PXE boot`_ interface is generic and works with all hardware that supports
booting from network. Alternatively, several vendors provide *virtual media*
implementations of the boot interface. They work by pushing an ISO image to
the node's `management controller`_, and do not require either PXE or iPXE.
Check your driver documentation at :doc:`../drivers` for details.

.. _pxe-boot:

PXE boot
--------

The ``pxe`` and ``ipxe`` boot interfaces uses PXE_ or iPXE_ accordingly to
deliver the target kernel/ramdisk pair. PXE uses relatively slow and unreliable
TFTP protocol for transfer, while iPXE uses HTTP. The downside of iPXE is that
it's less common, and usually requires bootstrapping using PXE first.

The ``pxe`` and ``ipxe`` boot interfaces work by preparing a PXE/iPXE
environment for a node on the file system, then instructing the DHCP provider
(for example, the Networking service) to boot the node from it. See
:ref:`direct-deploy-example` for a better understanding of the whole deployment
process.

.. note::
    Both PXE and iPXE are configured differently, when UEFI boot is used
    instead of conventional BIOS boot. This is particularly important for CPU
    architectures that do not have BIOS support at all.

The ``ipxe`` boot interface is used by default for many hardware types,
including ``ipmi``. Some hardware types, notably ``ilo`` and ``irmc`` have
their specific implementations of the PXE boot interface.

Additional configuration is required for this boot interface - see
:doc:`/install/configure-pxe` for details.

Kernel parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you need to pass additional kernel parameters to the deployment/cleaning
ramdisk (for example, to configure serial console), use the following
configuration option:

.. code-block:: ini

    [pxe]
    kernel_append_params = nofb nomodeset vga=normal

.. note::
   The option was called ``pxe_append_params`` before the Xena cycle.

Per-node and per-instance overrides are also possible, for example:

.. code-block:: bash

  baremetal node set node-0 \
    --driver-info kernel_append_params="nofb nomodeset vga=normal"
  baremetal node set node-0 \
    --instance-info kernel_append_params="nofb nomodeset vga=normal"

Starting with the Zed cycle, you can combine the parameters from the
configuration and from the node using the special ``%default%`` syntax:

.. code-block:: bash

  baremetal node set node-0 \
    --driver-info kernel_append_params="%default% console=ttyS0,115200n8"

Together with the configuration above, the following parameters will be
appended to the kernel command line::

    nofb nomodeset vga=normal console=ttyS0,115200n8

.. note::
   Ironic does not do any de-duplication of the resulting kernel parameters.
   Both kernel itself and dracut seem to give priority to the last instance
   of the same parameter.

Common options
--------------

Enable persistent boot device for deploy/clean operation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For (i)PXE booting, Ironic uses non-persistent boot order changes for
clean/deploy by default. For some drivers, persistent changes are far
more costly than non-persisent ones, so this approach can bring a
performance benefit.

In order to control this behavior, however, Ironic provides the
``force_persistent_boot_device`` flag in the node's ``driver_info``.
It allows the values ``Default`` (make all changes but the last one
upon deployment non-persistent), ``Always`` (make all changes persistent),
and ``Never`` (make all boot order changes non-persistent). For example
in order to have only persistent changes one would need to set something
like::

    $ openstack baremetal node set --driver-info force_persistent_boot_device='Always' <node>

.. note::
   It is recommended to check if the node's state has not changed as there
   is no way of locking the node between these commands.

.. note::
   The values 'True'/'False' for the option 'force_persistent_boot_device'
   in the node's driver info for the (i)PXE drivers are deprecated and
   support for them may be removed in a future release. The former default
   value 'False' is replaced by the new value 'Default', the value 'True'
   is replaced by 'Always'.


.. _PXE: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preboot_Execution_Environment
.. _iPXE: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPXE
.. _management controller: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Out-of-band_management

Commit message:

Remove use of nomodeset by default
The troubleshooting kernel command line option nomodeset
unfortunately changes the way framebuffer interactions work
with graphics devices which in some cases can result in kernel
memory to be used for graphics updates. When this happens on
some specific hardware common in rack mount servers with baseboard
management controllers, this can cause the memory bus to become
locked for a brief time while the graphics update is occuring.

This locked memory bus means disk IO can become blocked,
and network cards can overflow their buffers resulting in
packet loss on top of the latency incurred by the graphics
update executing.

As such, we've removed the nomodeset option from default usage and
added a note describing its removal to the documentation along
with a release note.

Change-Id: I9084d88c3ec6f13bd64b8707892758fa87dd7f86

doc/source/admin/interfaces/boot.rst, after:

===============
Boot interfaces
===============

The boot interface manages booting of both the deploy ramdisk and the user
instances on the bare metal node.

The `PXE boot`_ interface is generic and works with all hardware that supports
booting from network. Alternatively, several vendors provide *virtual media*
implementations of the boot interface. They work by pushing an ISO image to
the node's `management controller`_, and do not require either PXE or iPXE.
Check your driver documentation at :doc:`../drivers` for details.

.. _pxe-boot:

PXE boot
--------

The ``pxe`` and ``ipxe`` boot interfaces uses PXE_ or iPXE_ accordingly to
deliver the target kernel/ramdisk pair. PXE uses relatively slow and unreliable
TFTP protocol for transfer, while iPXE uses HTTP. The downside of iPXE is that
it's less common, and usually requires bootstrapping using PXE first.

The ``pxe`` and ``ipxe`` boot interfaces work by preparing a PXE/iPXE
environment for a node on the file system, then instructing the DHCP provider
(for example, the Networking service) to boot the node from it. See
:ref:`direct-deploy-example` for a better understanding of the whole deployment
process.

.. note::
    Both PXE and iPXE are configured differently, when UEFI boot is used
    instead of conventional BIOS boot. This is particularly important for CPU
    architectures that do not have BIOS support at all.

The ``ipxe`` boot interface is used by default for many hardware types,
including ``ipmi``. Some hardware types, notably ``ilo`` and ``irmc`` have
their specific implementations of the PXE boot interface.

Additional configuration is required for this boot interface - see
:doc:`/install/configure-pxe` for details.

Kernel parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you need to pass additional kernel parameters to the deployment/cleaning
ramdisk (for example, to configure serial console), use the following
configuration option:

.. code-block:: ini

    [pxe]
    kernel_append_params = nofb vga=normal

.. note::
   The option was called ``pxe_append_params`` before the Xena cycle.

Per-node and per-instance overrides are also possible, for example:

.. code-block:: bash

  baremetal node set node-0 \
    --driver-info kernel_append_params="nofb vga=normal"
  baremetal node set node-0 \
    --instance-info kernel_append_params="nofb vga=normal"

Starting with the Zed cycle, you can combine the parameters from the
configuration and from the node using the special ``%default%`` syntax:

.. code-block:: bash

  baremetal node set node-0 \
    --driver-info kernel_append_params="%default% console=ttyS0,115200n8"

Together with the configuration above, the following parameters will be
appended to the kernel command line::

    nofb vga=normal console=ttyS0,115200n8

.. note::
   Ironic does not do any de-duplication of the resulting kernel parameters.
   Both kernel itself and dracut seem to give priority to the last instance
   of the same parameter.

.. warning::
   Previously our documentation listed the Linux kernel parameter
   ``nomodeset`` as an option. This option is intended for troubleshooting,
   and can greatly degrade performance with Matrox/Aspeed BMC Graphics
   controllers which is very commonly used on physical servers. The
   performance degredation can greatly reduce IO capacity upon every
   console graphics update being written to the screen.

Common options
--------------

Enable persistent boot device for deploy/clean operation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For (i)PXE booting, Ironic uses non-persistent boot order changes for
clean/deploy by default. For some drivers, persistent changes are far
more costly than non-persisent ones, so this approach can bring a
performance benefit.

In order to control this behavior, however, Ironic provides the
``force_persistent_boot_device`` flag in the node's ``driver_info``.
It allows the values ``Default`` (make all changes but the last one
upon deployment non-persistent), ``Always`` (make all changes persistent),
and ``Never`` (make all boot order changes non-persistent). For example
in order to have only persistent changes one would need to set something
like::

    $ openstack baremetal node set --driver-info force_persistent_boot_device='Always' <node>

.. note::
   It is recommended to check if the node's state has not changed as there
   is no way of locking the node between these commands.

.. note::
   The values 'True'/'False' for the option 'force_persistent_boot_device'
   in the node's driver info for the (i)PXE drivers are deprecated and
   support for them may be removed in a future release. The former default
   value 'False' is replaced by the new value 'Default', the value 'True'
   is replaced by 'Always'.


.. _PXE: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preboot_Execution_Environment
.. _iPXE: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPXE
.. _management controller: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Out-of-band_management
