doc/source/admin/drivers/xclarity.rst, before:

===============
XClarity driver
===============

Overview
========

The ``xclarity`` driver is targeted for IMM 2.0 and IMM 3.0 managed Lenovo
servers. The xclarity hardware type enables the user to take advantage of
`XClarity Manager`_ by using the `XClarity Python Client`_.

Prerequisites
=============

* The XClarity Client library should be installed on the ironic conductor
  node(s).

  For example, it can be installed with ``pip``::

      sudo pip install python-xclarityclient

Enabling the XClarity driver
============================

#. Add ``xclarity`` to the list of ``enabled_hardware_types``,
   ``enabled_power_interfaces`` and ``enabled_management_interfaces``
   in ``/etc/ironic/ironic.conf``. For example::

    [DEFAULT]
    ...
    enabled_hardware_types = ipmi,xclarity
    enabled_power_interfaces = ipmitool,xclarity
    enabled_management_interfaces = ipmitool,xclarity

#. Restart the ironic conductor service::

    sudo service ironic-conductor restart

    # Or, for RDO:
    sudo systemctl restart openstack-ironic-conductor

Registering a node with the XClarity driver
===========================================

Nodes configured to use the driver should have the ``driver`` property
set to ``xclarity``.

The following properties are specified in the node's ``driver_info``
field and are required:

- ``xclarity_manager_ip``: The IP address of the XClarity Controller.
- ``xclarity_username``: User account with admin/server-profile access
  privilege to the XClarity Controller.
- ``xclarity_password``: User account password corresponding to the
  xclarity_username to the XClarity Controller.
- ``xclarity_hardware_id``: The hardware ID of the XClarity managed server.

The ``baremetal node create`` command can be used to enroll
a node with the ``xclarity`` driver. For example:

.. code-block:: bash

  baremetal node create --driver xclarity \
    --driver-info xclarity_manager_ip=https://10.240.217.101 \
    --driver-info xclarity_username=admin \
    --driver-info xclarity_password=password \
    --driver-info xclarity_hardware_id=hardware_id

For more information about enrolling nodes see :ref:`enrollment`
in the install guide.

.. _`XClarity Manager`: http://www3.lenovo.com/us/en/data-center/software/systems-management/xclarity/
.. _`XClarity Python Client`: http://pypi.org/project/python-xclarityclient/

Commit message:

Multiple driver related deprecations
An outcome of the Ironic 2024.1 PTG was that we would go ahead and
deprecate the ibmc, xclarity, and the wsman interfaces of the idrac
hardware type.

The forward path is Redfish, as evidenced by the idrac hardware
type having both wsman and redfish based interfaces available
for users to choose from.

These changes are being made by the Ironic team due to a lack of
recent upstream contact with any of the related driver maintainers.

Change-Id: Ia4aa99f4987570426bb155af8f437c9ba6013837

doc/source/admin/drivers/xclarity.rst, after:

===============
XClarity driver
===============

Overview
========

.. warning::
   The ``xlcarity`` driver has been deprecated and is anticipated to be removed
   from Ironic at some point during or after the 2024.2 development cycle.
   The anticipated forward management path is to migrate to the ``redfish``
   hardware type.

The ``xclarity`` driver is targeted for IMM 2.0 and IMM 3.0 managed Lenovo
servers. The xclarity hardware type enables the user to take advantage of
`XClarity Manager`_ by using the `XClarity Python Client`_.

Prerequisites
=============

* The XClarity Client library should be installed on the ironic conductor
  node(s).

  For example, it can be installed with ``pip``::

      sudo pip install python-xclarityclient

Enabling the XClarity driver
============================

#. Add ``xclarity`` to the list of ``enabled_hardware_types``,
   ``enabled_power_interfaces`` and ``enabled_management_interfaces``
   in ``/etc/ironic/ironic.conf``. For example::

    [DEFAULT]
    ...
    enabled_hardware_types = ipmi,xclarity
    enabled_power_interfaces = ipmitool,xclarity
    enabled_management_interfaces = ipmitool,xclarity

#. Restart the ironic conductor service::

    sudo service ironic-conductor restart

    # Or, for RDO:
    sudo systemctl restart openstack-ironic-conductor

Registering a node with the XClarity driver
===========================================

Nodes configured to use the driver should have the ``driver`` property
set to ``xclarity``.

The following properties are specified in the node's ``driver_info``
field and are required:

- ``xclarity_manager_ip``: The IP address of the XClarity Controller.
- ``xclarity_username``: User account with admin/server-profile access
  privilege to the XClarity Controller.
- ``xclarity_password``: User account password corresponding to the
  xclarity_username to the XClarity Controller.
- ``xclarity_hardware_id``: The hardware ID of the XClarity managed server.

The ``baremetal node create`` command can be used to enroll
a node with the ``xclarity`` driver. For example:

.. code-block:: bash

  baremetal node create --driver xclarity \
    --driver-info xclarity_manager_ip=https://10.240.217.101 \
    --driver-info xclarity_username=admin \
    --driver-info xclarity_password=password \
    --driver-info xclarity_hardware_id=hardware_id

For more information about enrolling nodes see :ref:`enrollment`
in the install guide.

.. _`XClarity Manager`: http://www3.lenovo.com/us/en/data-center/software/systems-management/xclarity/
.. _`XClarity Python Client`: http://pypi.org/project/python-xclarityclient/
