doc/source/install/configure-glance-images.rst, before:

.. _image-requirements:

Add images to the Image service
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#. Build or download the user images as described in
   :doc:`/user/creating-images`.

#. Add the user images to the Image service

   Load all the images created in the below steps into the Image service,
   and note the image UUIDs in the Image service for each one as it is
   generated.

   For *partition images*:

   - Add the kernel and ramdisk images to the Image service:

     .. code-block:: console

        $ openstack image create my-kernel --public \
          --disk-format aki --container-format aki --file my-image.vmlinuz

     Store the image uuid obtained from the above step as ``MY_VMLINUZ_UUID``.

     .. code-block:: console

        $ openstack image create my-image.initrd --public \
          --disk-format ari --container-format ari --file my-image.initrd

     Store the image UUID obtained from the above step as ``MY_INITRD_UUID``.

   - Add the *my-image* to the Image service which is going to be the OS
     that the user is going to run. Also associate the above created
     images with this OS image. These two operations can be done by
     executing the following command:

     .. code-block:: console

        $ openstack image create my-image --public \
          --disk-format qcow2 --container-format bare --property \
          kernel_id=$MY_VMLINUZ_UUID --property \
          ramdisk_id=$MY_INITRD_UUID --file my-image.qcow2

   For *whole disk images*, skip uploading and configuring kernel and ramdisk
   images completely, proceed directly to uploading the main image:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ openstack image create my-whole-disk-image --public \
        --disk-format qcow2 --container-format bare \
        --file my-whole-disk-image.qcow2

   .. warning::
       The kernel/initramfs pair must not be set for whole disk images,
       otherwise they'll be mistaken for partition images.

#. Build or download the deploy images

   The deploy images are used initially for preparing the server (creating disk
   partitions) before the actual OS can be deployed.

   There are several methods to build or download deploy images, please read
   the :ref:`deploy-ramdisk` section.

#. Add the deploy images to the Image service

   Add the deployment kernel and ramdisk images to the Image service:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ openstack image create deploy-vmlinuz --public \
        --disk-format aki --container-format aki \
        --file ironic-python-agent.vmlinuz

   Store the image UUID obtained from the above step as ``DEPLOY_VMLINUZ_UUID``.

   .. code-block:: console

      $ openstack image create deploy-initrd --public \
        --disk-format ari --container-format ari \
        --file ironic-python-agent.initramfs

   Store the image UUID obtained from the above step as ``DEPLOY_INITRD_UUID``.

Commit message:

Support img_type Glance property
Follow-up to change I4ce5f7a2317d952f976194d2022328f4afbb0258.

Change-Id: I36673c801d426ea9cb204ca52b6fb6f719eb396a
Depends-On: https://review.opendev.org/c/openstack/glance/+/826684

doc/source/install/configure-glance-images.rst, after:

.. _image-requirements:

Add images to the Image service
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#. Build or download the user images as described in
   :doc:`/user/creating-images`.

#. Add the user images to the Image service

   Load all the images created in the below steps into the Image service,
   and note the image UUIDs in the Image service for each one as it is
   generated.

   - For *whole disk images* just upload the image:

     .. code-block:: console

        $ openstack image create my-whole-disk-image --public \
          --disk-format qcow2 --container-format bare \
          --file my-whole-disk-image.qcow2

     .. warning::
         The kernel/ramdisk pair must not be set for whole disk images,
         otherwise they'll be mistaken for partition images.

   - For *partition images* to be used only with *local boot* (the default)
     the ``img_type`` property must be set:

     .. code-block:: console

        $ openstack image create my-image --public \
          --disk-format qcow2 --container-format bare \
          --property img_type=partition --file my-image.qcow2

   - For *partition images* to be used with both *local* and *network* boot:

     Add the kernel and ramdisk images to the Image service:

     .. code-block:: console

        $ openstack image create my-kernel --public \
          --disk-format aki --container-format aki --file my-image.vmlinuz

     Store the image uuid obtained from the above step as ``MY_VMLINUZ_UUID``.

     .. code-block:: console

        $ openstack image create my-image.initrd --public \
          --disk-format ari --container-format ari --file my-image.initrd

     Store the image UUID obtained from the above step as ``MY_INITRD_UUID``.

     Add the *my-image* to the Image service which is going to be the OS
     that the user is going to run. Also associate the above created
     images with this OS image. These two operations can be done by
     executing the following command:

     .. code-block:: console

        $ openstack image create my-image --public \
          --disk-format qcow2 --container-format bare --property \
          kernel_id=$MY_VMLINUZ_UUID --property \
          ramdisk_id=$MY_INITRD_UUID --file my-image.qcow2

#. Build or download the deploy images

   The deploy images are used initially for preparing the server (creating disk
   partitions) before the actual OS can be deployed.

   There are several methods to build or download deploy images, please read
   the :ref:`deploy-ramdisk` section.

#. Add the deploy images to the Image service

   Add the deployment kernel and ramdisk images to the Image service:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ openstack image create deploy-vmlinuz --public \
        --disk-format aki --container-format aki \
        --file ironic-python-agent.vmlinuz

   Store the image UUID obtained from the above step as ``DEPLOY_VMLINUZ_UUID``.

   .. code-block:: console

      $ openstack image create deploy-initrd --public \
        --disk-format ari --container-format ari \
        --file ironic-python-agent.initramfs

   Store the image UUID obtained from the above step as ``DEPLOY_INITRD_UUID``.
