doc/source/install/standalone/enrollment.rst, before:

Enrollment
==========

Preparing images
----------------

If you don't use Image service, it's possible to provide images to Bare Metal
service via a URL.

At the moment, only two types of URLs are acceptable instead of Image
service UUIDs: HTTP(S) URLs (for example, "http://my.server.net/images/img")
and file URLs (file:///images/img).

There are however some limitations for different hardware interfaces:

* If you're using :ref:`direct-deploy` with HTTP(s) URLs, you have to provide
  the Bare Metal service with the a checksum of your instance image.

  MD5 is used by default for backward compatibility reasons. To compute an MD5
  checksum, you can use the following command:

  .. code-block:: console

   $ md5sum image.qcow2
   ed82def8730f394fb85aef8a208635f6  image.qcow2

  Alternatively, use a SHA256 checksum or any other algorithm supported by
  the Python's hashlib_, e.g.:

  .. code-block:: console

   $ sha256sum image.qcow2
   9f6c942ad81690a9926ff530629fb69a82db8b8ab267e2cbd59df417c1a28060  image.qcow2

* :ref:`direct-deploy` started supporting ``file://`` images in the Victoria
  release cycle, before that only HTTP(s) had been supported.

  .. warning::
     File images must be accessible to every conductor! Use a shared file
     system if you have more than one conductor. The ironic CLI tool will not
     transfer the file from a local machine to the conductor(s).

.. note::
   The Bare Metal service tracks content changes for non-Glance images by
   checking their modification date and time. For example, for HTTP image,
   if 'Last-Modified' header value from response to a HEAD request to
   "http://my.server.net/images/deploy.ramdisk" is greater than cached image
   modification time, Ironic will re-download the content. For "file://"
   images, the file system modification time is used.

.. _hashlib: https://docs.python.org/3/library/hashlib.html

Enrolling nodes
---------------

#. Create a node in Bare Metal service. At minimum, you must specify the driver
   name (for example, ``ipmi``). You can also specify all the required
   driver parameters in one command. This will return the node UUID:

   .. code-block:: console

    $ baremetal node create --driver ipmi \
        --driver-info ipmi_address=ipmi.server.net \
        --driver-info ipmi_username=user \
        --driver-info ipmi_password=pass \
        --driver-info deploy_kernel=file:///images/deploy.vmlinuz \
        --driver-info deploy_ramdisk=http://my.server.net/images/deploy.ramdisk
    +--------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    | Property     | Value                                                                    |
    +--------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    | uuid         | be94df40-b80a-4f63-b92b-e9368ee8d14c                                     |
    | driver_info  | {u'deploy_ramdisk': u'http://my.server.net/images/deploy.ramdisk',       |
    |              | u'deploy_kernel': u'file:///images/deploy.vmlinuz', u'ipmi_address':     |
    |              | u'ipmi.server.net', u'ipmi_username': u'user', u'ipmi_password':         |
    |              | u'******'}                                                               |
    | extra        | {}                                                                       |
    | driver       | ipmi                                                                     |
    | chassis_uuid |                                                                          |
    | properties   | {}                                                                       |
    +--------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+

   Note that here deploy_kernel and deploy_ramdisk contain links to
   images instead of Image service UUIDs.

#. As in case of Compute service, you can also provide ``capabilities`` to node
   properties, but they will be used only by Bare Metal service (for example,
   boot mode). Although you don't need to add properties like ``memory_mb``,
   ``cpus`` etc. as Bare Metal service will require UUID of a node you're
   going to deploy.

#. Then create a port to inform Bare Metal service of the network interface
   cards which are part of the node by creating a port with each NIC's MAC
   address. In this case, they're used for naming of PXE configs for a node:

   .. code-block:: shell

    baremetal port create $MAC_ADDRESS --node $NODE_UUID

Commit message:

Always update cache for HTTP images if Last Modified is unknown
Currently we default to assuming the cache is up-to-date. This is likely
wrong. Normal web servers provide Last Modified for files they serve.
If it is absent, chances are high the image is served by some sort
of a dynamic service, which may modify the URL on fly.

In any case, always updating the image is a safer choice.

Change-Id: I0548db14a97638d26ebb687e8f47f1b295d1f774

doc/source/install/standalone/enrollment.rst, after:

Enrollment
==========

Preparing images
----------------

If you don't use Image service, it's possible to provide images to Bare Metal
service via a URL.

At the moment, only two types of URLs are acceptable instead of Image
service UUIDs: HTTP(S) URLs (for example, "http://my.server.net/images/img")
and file URLs (file:///images/img).

There are however some limitations for different hardware interfaces:

* If you're using :ref:`direct-deploy` with HTTP(s) URLs, you have to provide
  the Bare Metal service with the a checksum of your instance image.

  MD5 is used by default for backward compatibility reasons. To compute an MD5
  checksum, you can use the following command:

  .. code-block:: console

   $ md5sum image.qcow2
   ed82def8730f394fb85aef8a208635f6  image.qcow2

  Alternatively, use a SHA256 checksum or any other algorithm supported by
  the Python's hashlib_, e.g.:

  .. code-block:: console

   $ sha256sum image.qcow2
   9f6c942ad81690a9926ff530629fb69a82db8b8ab267e2cbd59df417c1a28060  image.qcow2

* :ref:`direct-deploy` started supporting ``file://`` images in the Victoria
  release cycle, before that only HTTP(s) had been supported.

  .. warning::
     File images must be accessible to every conductor! Use a shared file
     system if you have more than one conductor. The ironic CLI tool will not
     transfer the file from a local machine to the conductor(s).

.. note::
   The Bare Metal service tracks content changes for non-Glance images by
   checking their modification date and time. For example, for HTTP image,
   if 'Last-Modified' header value from response to a HEAD request to
   "http://my.server.net/images/deploy.ramdisk" is greater than cached image
   modification time, Ironic will re-download the content. For "file://"
   images, the file system modification time is used.

   If the HTTP server does not provide the last modification date and time,
   the image will be redownloaded every time it is used.

.. _hashlib: https://docs.python.org/3/library/hashlib.html

Enrolling nodes
---------------

#. Create a node in Bare Metal service. At minimum, you must specify the driver
   name (for example, ``ipmi``). You can also specify all the required
   driver parameters in one command. This will return the node UUID:

   .. code-block:: console

    $ baremetal node create --driver ipmi \
        --driver-info ipmi_address=ipmi.server.net \
        --driver-info ipmi_username=user \
        --driver-info ipmi_password=pass \
        --driver-info deploy_kernel=file:///images/deploy.vmlinuz \
        --driver-info deploy_ramdisk=http://my.server.net/images/deploy.ramdisk
    +--------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    | Property     | Value                                                                    |
    +--------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    | uuid         | be94df40-b80a-4f63-b92b-e9368ee8d14c                                     |
    | driver_info  | {u'deploy_ramdisk': u'http://my.server.net/images/deploy.ramdisk',       |
    |              | u'deploy_kernel': u'file:///images/deploy.vmlinuz', u'ipmi_address':     |
    |              | u'ipmi.server.net', u'ipmi_username': u'user', u'ipmi_password':         |
    |              | u'******'}                                                               |
    | extra        | {}                                                                       |
    | driver       | ipmi                                                                     |
    | chassis_uuid |                                                                          |
    | properties   | {}                                                                       |
    +--------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------+

   Note that here deploy_kernel and deploy_ramdisk contain links to
   images instead of Image service UUIDs.

#. As in case of Compute service, you can also provide ``capabilities`` to node
   properties, but they will be used only by Bare Metal service (for example,
   boot mode). Although you don't need to add properties like ``memory_mb``,
   ``cpus`` etc. as Bare Metal service will require UUID of a node you're
   going to deploy.

#. Then create a port to inform Bare Metal service of the network interface
   cards which are part of the node by creating a port with each NIC's MAC
   address. In this case, they're used for naming of PXE configs for a node:

   .. code-block:: shell

    baremetal port create $MAC_ADDRESS --node $NODE_UUID
